RFC: Establish an RFC process (#2)
lf-lang/rfcs: text/0001-rfc-process.md

    request the RFC will receive design feedback from the larger community, and
    the author should be prepared to revise it in response.
  - Now that your RFC has an open pull request, use the issue number of the PR
    to update your `0000-` prefix to that number.
  - Build consensus and integrate feedback. RFCs that have broad support are
    much more likely to make progress than those that don't receive any
    comments. Feel free to reach out in particular to get help identifying
    stakeholders and obstacles.
  - The team will discuss the RFC pull request, as much as possible in the
    comment thread of the pull request itself. Offline discussion will be
    summarized on the pull request comment thread.
  - RFCs rarely go through this process unchanged, especially as alternatives
    and drawbacks are shown. You can make edits, big and small, to the RFC to
    clarify or change the design, but make changes as new commits to the pull
    request, and leave a comment on the pull request explaining your changes.
    Specifically, do not squash or rebase commits after they are visible on the
    pull request.

>   - At some point, a member of the team will propose a "motion for final

Reviewer: FYI: in IETF speak this would be called "WG Last Call"

Reviewer 2: I think "motion" is clearer than "last call." (As used in Robert's Rules, for instance.)

    comment period" (FCP), along with a *disposition* for the RFC (merge, close,
    or postpone).

>     - This step is taken when enough of the tradeoffs have been discussed that

Reviewer: The proper term would be : "rough consensus" 
-> https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7282

      time and notification for stakeholders to push back if it is made
      prematurely.
    - For RFCs with lengthy discussion, the motion to FCP is usually preceded by
      a *summary comment* trying to lay out the current state of the discussion
      and major tradeoffs/points of disagreement.
    - The motion for FCP should include a checkbox list that tags major
      stakeholder and reviewers that need to sign off on the FCP. This is often
      the point at which many team members first review the RFC in full depth.
      Once a majority of reviewers approve (and at most 2 approvals are outstanding),
      the FCP begins.
  - The FCP lasts ten calendar days, so that it is open for at least 5 business
    days. It is also advertised widely,
    e.g. on the LF mailing list. This way all
    stakeholders have a chance to lodge any final objections before a decision
    is reached.
  - In most cases, the FCP period is quiet, and the RFC is either merged or
    closed. However, sometimes substantial new arguments or ideas are raised,
    the FCP is canceled, and the RFC goes back into development mode.

## The RFC life-cycle
[The RFC life-cycle]: #the-rfc-life-cycle

> Once an RFC becomes "active" then authors may implement it and submit the

Reviewer: I think it is very desirable to have an implementation ready before the Draft is merged. 

-> Normally, the code and the rfc are developed side by side, this gives the benefit that the rfc is enriched by developer / implementer feedback

Author: Maybe the sentence is formulated a bit too strict here. Of course, a contributor may also work on an implementation earlier on. It would be risky, however. The main goal of RFCs as proposed here is to build an agreement behind a proposal, not behind an implementation. Also, it acts as a mechanism for contributors to get feedback early on so that they can understand if the feature they are planning is desirable before hey put in the work of implementing it. I think this goal is likely different from the IETF RFCs.

Reviewer: I think developing them side by side is a good feasibility test and avoids situations where proposals look good on paper but not in reality.

Author: That would be a major change to the proposal though. The proposed process explicitly focuses on discussing ideas and features, not implementations. The main idea is to commit to thinking an idea through before implementing it. That does not rule out that an RFC is guided by an implementation, but I think it shouldn't be the norm.

Of course it can be complicated or infeasible to implement an RFC. If it is unclear how the RFC could be implemented, this should be part of the discussion. It is also possible to list implementation aspects under "Unresolved Questions" in the proposed template.

Also note that the proposed process explicitly states that active RFCs are not a guarantee that an implementation PR actually gets merged. If the implementation is bad the PR should be rejected. If the implementation is bad because of a flaw in the RFC, then the RFC should be amended or replaced.

The proposed RFC process is intended to be rather lightweight. If we include also the implementation, it will be a significantly longer process.

Reviewer 3: I think I agree with Christian here. I think our current workflow, with thorough code reviews and CI, works quite well for guiding the development of features. But what lacks is a structured way of agreeing on what features we should target (which is exactly what the RFC process is about).

An example is the work I am doing on the [physical clock abstraction in the C runtime]( https://github.com/lf-lang/reactor-c/pull/346), the question of how the LF runtime system should react if a clock synchronization client running on the system, like `chrony` or `ptpd` steps the clocks back or forward 100ms is not only a problem for the C target. I think such questions would be great to discuss through an RFC at the "idea-level"

Reviewer 4: > Of course, a contributor may also work on an implementation earlier on. It would be risky, however.

I agree with this. I think it is important for anyone who works on an implementation before the RFC is approved to be aware that there is a significant risk that their work will be discarded.

> I think such questions would be great to discuss through an RFC at the "idea-level"

I also agree with this, I think that we should have high-level discussions that have the potential to change or reject a proposed feature and that don't get bogged down in details about the implementation.

> I think developing them side by side is a good feasibility test and avoids situations where proposals look good on paper but not in reality.

But on the other hand I also do agree with this. I do not know about anyone else, but if I were to propose a feature, I might be much more comfortable discussing it if I already had a prototype or partial implementation. I think it makes sense to tolerate either approach (implement before RFC approval, or wait for approval) as long as everyone understands the risk of rejecting a premature implementation and as long as people agree to focus RFCs on high-level discussion

> Once an RFC becomes "active" then authors may implement it and submit the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once an RFC becomes "active," anyone may submit an implementation of the
```

merged RFC to actually reflect what the end result will be at the time of the
next major release.

In general, once accepted, RFCs should not be substantially changed. Only very
minor changes should be submitted as amendments. More substantial changes
should be new RFCs, with a note added to the original RFC. Exactly what counts
as a "very minor change" is up to the team to decide.

## Reviewing RFCs
[Reviewing RFCs]: #reviewing-rfcs

While the RFC pull request is up, the core developers may schedule meetings with
the author and/or relevant stakeholders to discuss the issues in greater detail,
and in some cases the topic may be discussed at a regular LF meeting. In either
case a summary from the meeting will be posted back to the RFC pull request.

Final decisions about RFCs are made after the benefits and drawbacks are well
understood. These decisions can be made at any time. When a decision is made,
the RFC pull request will either be merged or closed. In either case, if the
reasoning is not clear from the discussion in the thread, the a comment
describing the rationale for the decision will be added.

## Implementing an RFC
[Implementing an RFC]: #implementing-an-rfc

> Some accepted RFCs represent vital features that need to be implemented right

Reviewer: I would like to raise the point about what is officially supported. 

-> What are the sections of code that always should have feature parity?

Author: Could you elaborate on what you mean here? I don't understand the question, unfortunately.

Reviewer: Okay, let us say we approve a new RFC that adds some runtime/language features. The question is, what are significant changes and what are not? I would argue that we should define a language core and that any RFC that changes the language core should be merged in one go. I think we'd be shooting ourselves in the foot if a Lingua Franca release has only a half-functioning feature (e.g. C target has support, but CPP doesn't).

Reviewer 2: I think that this might be too tall of an order. It rules out features that cannot be supported by all targets and it could cause features to be delayed indefinitely if maintainers of some targets prioritize other things...

Author: Its also an orthogonal question in my opinion. The proposed RFC process explicitly focuses on features, not implementations. Accepted (active) RFCs are an indication that the community is interested in a specific feature. It does not mean that there is or will be a complete implementation of that feature in the near term. It could also be that an active RFC is never implemented because it simply isn't a priority.

The point you raise is important, too. How do we manage the heterogeneity of features between the LF targets? How do we ensure some level of feature parity? These are beyond the scope of the RFC process as proposed here. I also don't see a clear way for including these questions in our process. Do you have a concrete proposal? Otherwise, I would say this is a great topic for a future RFC.

cannot determine if someone else is already working on it, feel free to ask
(e.g. by leaving a comment on the associated issue).

## RFC Postponement
[RFC Postponement]: #rfc-postponement

Some RFC pull requests are tagged with the "postponed" label when they are
closed (as part of the rejection process). An RFC closed with "postponed" is
marked as such because we want neither to think about evaluating the proposal
nor about implementing the described feature until some time in the future, and
we believe that we can afford to wait until then to do so.
Postponed pull requests may be re-opened when the time is right. We don't have
any formal process for that, you should ask members of the core team.

Usually an RFC pull request marked as "postponed" has already passed an
informal first round of evaluation, namely the round of "do we think we would
ever possibly consider making this change, as outlined in the RFC pull request,
or some semi-obvious variation of it." (When the answer to the latter question
is "no", then the appropriate response is to close the RFC, not postpone it.)

## License
[License]: #license

> TODO

Reviewer: See my comments on martens issue #1

---

Text to be placed in `0000_template.md`:

---

- Feature Name: (fill me in with a unique ident, `my_awesome_feature`)
- Start Date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
- RFC PR: [lf-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/lf-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Tracking Issue: [lf-lang/lingua-franca#0000](https://github.com/lf-lang/lingua-franca/issues/0000)

# Summary

> [summary]: #summary

Reviewer: abstract

Author: Is this a proposed change? Is there any reasoning behind it?

Reviewer: yeah I prefer abstract to summary.

Reviewer 2: ~~If it's an abstract it should appear at the beginning of the document, so I think summary is adequate here...~~ Sorry, I didn't realize this was the beginning of the template :man_facepalming:  Yes, "abstract" should work here.

Author: Alright, we can rename this section.

Yes, the idea of the RFC template is that it includes the documentation of the proposed feature. Which in this case is the template and the README.

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Why should we *not* do this?

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

- Why is this design the best in the space of possible designs?
- What other designs have been considered and what is the rationale for not choosing them?
- What is the impact of not doing this?
- If this is a language proposal, could this be done in a library instead? Does the proposed change make LF code easier or harder to read, understand, and maintain?

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Discuss prior art, both the good and the bad, in relation to this proposal.
A few examples of what this can include are:

- For language, library, runtime, and compiler proposals: Does this feature exist in other programming languages and what experience have their community had?
- For community proposals: Is this done by some other community and what were their experiences with it?
- For other teams: What lessons can we learn from what other communities have done here?
- Papers: Are there any published papers or great posts that discuss this? If you have some relevant papers to refer to, this can serve as a more detailed theoretical background.

> This section is intended to encourage you as an author to think about the lessons from other languages and frameworks, provide readers of your RFC with a fuller picture.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This section is intended to encourage you as an author to think about the lessons from other languages and frameworks, and to provide readers of your RFC with a fuller picture.
```

If there is no prior art, that is fine - your ideas are interesting to us whether they are brand new or if it is an adaptation from solutions.

Note that while precedent set by other languages is some motivation, it does not on its own motivate an RFC.

> Please also take into consideration that rust sometimes intentionally diverges from common language features.

Reviewer 4: This comment about Rust may not apply to LF

Reviewer 2: If you change "rust" to "Lingua Franca" the sentence sounds reasonable to me though!

> Please also take into consideration that rust sometimes intentionally diverges from common language features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please also take into consideration that Lingua Franca sometimes intentionally diverges from common language features.
```

and of the relevant sub-team.

This is also a good place to "dump ideas", if they are out of scope for the
RFC you are writing but otherwise related.

If you have tried and cannot think of any future possibilities,
you may simply state that you cannot think of anything.

Note that having something written down in the future-possibilities section
is not a reason to accept the current or a future RFC; such notes should be
in the section on motivation or rationale in this or subsequent RFCs.
The section merely provides additional information.

---

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

The proposed RFC process is heavily inspired by the [Rust
RFCs](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs). The description above was adjusted
slightly to better fit our current community structure and scale.

When accepted, the above description will become the content of the main README
file in the repository and define the process we use for proposing, reviewing,
discussing and accepting/rejecting RFCs. We will further add the file called
`0000-template.md` to the root of the repository to act as a template for new
RFCs.

> # Drawbacks

Reviewer: Normally there are sections called like: `Security Considerations`, `Deployment Recommendations` 

-> Where the potential impact on the ecosystem or users is described.

Author: I think those terms do not apply in our case. Which considerations are relevant to an RFC depends on the precise scope of the RFC. Therefore, I would argue we should keep it general. If we notice that certain points are always requested, we can still update the template.

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- RFCs impose a more formal style and potentially could slow down development.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

A variation of the proposed RFC process has been used successfully by the Rust
community for the last 10 years. The process is intended to enforce a more

> disciplined approach wile being as light-weight as possible. The main rationale

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
disciplined approach while being as light-weight as possible. The main rationale
```

RFCs.

There are many potential alternatives to the proposed RFC process. The [Python
enhancement proposals (PEPs)](https://peps.python.org/pep-0001/), for instance,
uses a more formal process and it is challenging for a new PEP to be accepted.
Since we are still a relatively young community a more lightweight process
appears to be appropriate.

Another alternative would be to continue as we did and not establish an RFC
process. This approach, however, will likely not scale to a larger community and
harden the problems we are facing with respect to an overarching design and
architecture.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

- The proposed RFC process is heavily inspired (this is not to say shamelessly copied) from the [Rust community](https://github.com/lf-lang/rfcs)
- Python uses [PEP (Python enhancement proposals)](https://peps.python.org/pep-0001/), which is similar to the idea of RFCs but slightly more formal.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- Which license should we use for RFCs in this repository?
- How can we send out FCPs to all interested parties? (The mailing list would

>   work, put currently there is no way for people to subscribe)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  work, but currently there is no way for people to subscribe)
```

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

- The process can be partially automated using a bot. This is done by the Rust
community. However, for now, we should try to establish a process that works for
us (and refine it) before automating the process.

> - We can automatically generate a website that lists all active RFCs. The Rust

Reviewer 2: I'm in favor of using `mdbook` for this purpose as well.
